Cognitive individual differences in language acquisition have been an area of much research within psycholinguistics (Pozzan & Trueswell, 2015; Kroll & Sunderman, 2005, among many others), neuroimaging and cognitive psychology (Abutalebi, 2008; Abutalebi & Green, 2007; Indefry, 2006, among others), and Second Language Acquisition (Serafini & Sanz, 2016; Linck et al., 2013, among many others). Many of these studies observe a decreased role of cognitive control as language proficiency develops. Consider the behavioral data collected in previous studies, for example. Serafini & Sanz (2016) conducted a longitudinal study with proficiency as an independent variable. They measured the role of cognitive functions in the acquisition process by comparing automaticity of ten different morphological structures in Spanish, two cognitive variables (cognitive control  and phonological short term memory), within different proficiency groups (beginning, intermediate and advanced learners). The authors only observed robust correlations between linguistic performance and cognitive variables for beginners, while more advanced learners revealed far fewer significant correlations between linguistic and non-linguistic performance, suggesting a decreased reliance on the ability to encode, store and retrieve information as exposure and proficiency increase in classroom learning. While Serafini and Sanz (2016) are among the very first researchers to specifically compare the role of cognitive functions at various points of L2 proficiency using the same assessment measures, their findings do fit within a long line of previous research supporting the finding of a differential influence of cognitive function at early but not later stages of language learning (compare Linck & Weiss, 2011; Sagarra & Herschensohn, 2010, vs. Grey, Cox, Serafini & Sanz, 2015; however, see Linck et al., 2013 for a review). These behavioral findings are also supported by neuroimaging data. Collecting neuroimaging data from several fMRI and PET studies of neural structures during bilingual processing, Abutalebi (2008) observed increased activity of the LIFG and other prefrontal structures critical for cognitive control among participants processing a non-native, non-proficient language. The suggestion of this finding is that, as the speaker attains a sufficient level of L2 proficiency, the extra activity fades (Abutalebi & Green, 2007). Bear in mind that the role of cognitive control is to promote relevant information (or suppress irrelevant information), which in the case of bilingual processing can be considered competing forms and linguistic structures, i.e. conflict between languages, and as repeated activation strengthens these networks, the need for cognitive control to intervene decreases (Fedorenko & Thompson-Schill, 2014). Researchers disagree whether this decreased activity is a convergence to the activity involved in L1 activity or if the decreased activity is better understood within the notion of neural organizational efficiency (Indefrey, 2006). However, for our purposes, the observation that there is decreased hemodynamic activity is sufficient to suggest that cognitive control’s influence lessens with increased L2 proficiency. 
As Serafini and Sanz (2016) observe, their study is among the first to use the same targets across proficiencies to compare cognitive engagement at different stages of learning, but it considers a range of ten linguistic structures. They motivate the need to isolate fewer specific targets to increase subsequent studies’ power. One target that can serve to fill this gap is syntactic temporary ambiguities, which have been shown to directly engage cognitive control. The authors encourage maintaining a cross-sectional study, which would permit a more detailed understanding of the working memory constructs involved at increasing levels of L2 development. Recent research in child language processing conducted by Pozzan and Trueswell (2015) has also motivated this same cross-sectional study of cognitive control and ambiguity resolution, creating an opportunity for cross-field communication, as will be discussed below.
